During development of a fetus,
tissues in the lip or palate
may not come together properly,
resulting in a cleft.
A cleft lip means the upper lip
is open on one
or both sides.
A cleft lip can be surgically repaired.
A cut is made on both sides
of the cleft from the mouth
into the nostril.
The dark pink outer part
of the cleft is turned down,
and the muscle and skin of the lip
are pulled together.
A cleft palate means the roof
of the mouth or palate
has an opening in the soft part
at the back or forward
toward the bony part.
Surgical repair of a cleft palate
involves making a cut on
both sides of the separation
in the roof of the mouth.
Tissue from each side is then moved
to the center and joined.
The nostrils may also be repaired
during this surgery or
at another operation.
These surgeries are usually done
in infants or toddlers.